Disks and Volumes
=================

Making persistent storage in the cluster (**volumes**) accessible to VMs
consists of three parts. First, volumes are specified in `spec.volumes`.
Second, disks are added to the VM by specifying them in
`spec.domain.devices.disks`. Finally, a reference to the specified
volume is added to the disk specification by name.

Disks
-----

Like all other vmi devices a `spec.domain.devices.disks` element has a
mandatory `name`, and furthermore, the disk’s `name` must reference the
`name` of a volume inside `spec.volumes`.

A disk can be made accessible via four different types:

-   [**lun**](#lun)

-   [**disk**](#disk)

-   [**cdrom**](#cdrom)

-   [**floppy**](#floppy) *DEPRECATED*

All possible configuration options are available in the [Disk API
Reference](https://kubevirt.github.io/api-reference/master/definitions.html#_v1_disk).

All types, with the exception of **floppy**, allow you to specify the
`bus` attribute. The `bus` attribute determines how the disk will be
presented to the guest operating system. **floppy** disks don’t support
the `bus` attribute: they are always attached to the `fdc` bus.

### lun

A `lun` disk will expose the volume as a LUN device to the VM. This
allows the VM to execute arbitrary iSCSI command passthrough.

A minimal example which attaches a `PersistentVolumeClaim` named `mypvc`
as a `lun` device to the VM:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-lun
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            # This makes it a lun device
            lun: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

### disk

A `disk` disk will expose the volume as an ordinary disk to the VM.

A minimal example which attaches a `PersistentVolumeClaim` named `mypvc`
as a `disk` device to the VM:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-disk
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            # This makes it a disk
            disk: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

You can set the disk `bus` type, overriding the defaults, which in turn
depends on the chipset the VM is configured to use:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-disk
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            # This makes it a disk
            disk:
              # This makes it exposed as /dev/vda, being the only and thus first
              # disk attached to the VM
              bus: virtio
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

### floppy

> **Note**: Starting with version 0.16.0, floppy disks are deprecated
> and will be **rejected**. They will be removed from the API in a
> future version.

A `floppy` disk will expose the volume as a floppy drive to the VM.

A minimal example which attaches a `PersistentVolumeClaim` named `mypvc`
as a `floppy` device to the VM:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-floppy
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            # This makes it a floppy
            floppy: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

### cdrom

A `cdrom` disk will expose the volume as a cdrom drive to the VM. It is
read-only by default.

A minimal example which attaches a `PersistentVolumeClaim` named `mypvc`
as a `floppy` device to the VM:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-cdrom
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            # This makes it a cdrom
            cdrom:
              # This makes the cdrom writeable
              readOnly: false
              # This makes the cdrom be exposed as SATA device
              bus: sata
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

Volumes
-------

Supported volume sources are

-   [**cloudInitNoCloud**](#cloudinitnocloud)

-   [**cloudInitConfigDrive**](#cloudinitconfigdrive)

-   [**persistentVolumeClaim**](#persistentvolumeclaim)

-   [**dataVolume**](#datavolume)

-   [**ephemeral**](#ephemeral)

-   [**containerDisk**](#containerdisk)

-   [**emptyDisk**](#emptydisk)

-   [**hostDisk**](#hostdisk)

-   [**configMap**](#configmap)

-   [**secret**](#secret)

-   [**serviceAccount**](#serviceaccount)

All possible configuration options are available in the [Volume API
Reference](https://kubevirt.github.io/api-reference/master/definitions.html#_v1_volume).

### cloudInitNoCloud

Allows attaching `cloudInitNoCloud` data-sources to the VM. If the VM
contains a proper cloud-init setup, it will pick up the disk as a
user-data source.

A simple example which attaches a `Secret` as a cloud-init `disk`
datasource may look like this:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-cloudinitnocloud
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mybootdisk
            lun: {}
          - name: mynoclouddisk
            disk: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mybootdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc
        - name: mynoclouddisk
          cloudInitNoCloud:
            secretRef:
              name: testsecret

### cloudInitConfigDrive

Allows attaching `cloudInitConfigDrive` data-sources to the VM. If the
VM contains a proper cloud-init setup, it will pick up the disk as a
user-data source.

A simple example which attaches a `Secret` as a cloud-init `disk`
datasource may look like this:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-cloudinitconfigdrive
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mybootdisk
            lun: {}
          - name: myconfigdrivedisk
            disk: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mybootdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc
        - name: myconfigdrivedisk
          cloudInitConfigDrive:
            secretRef:
              name: testsecret

### persistentVolumeClaim

Allows connecting a `PersistentVolumeClaim` to a VM disk.

Use a PersistentVolumeClaim when the VirtualMachineInstance’s disk needs
to persist after the VM terminates. This allows for the VM’s data to
remain persistent between restarts.

A `PersistentVolume` can be in “filesystem” or “block” mode:

-   Filesystem: For KubeVirt to be able to consume the disk present on a
    PersistentVolume’s filesystem, the disk must be named `disk.img` and
    be placed in the root path of the filesystem. Currently the disk is
    also required to be in raw format. &gt; **Important:** The
    `disk.img` image file needs to be owned by the user-id `107` in
    order to avoid permission issues.

    > **Note:** If the `disk.img` image file has not been created
    > manually before starting a VM then it will be created
    > automatically with the `PersistentVolumeClaim` size. Since not
    > every storage provisioner provides volumes with the exact usable
    > amount of space as requested (e.g. due to filesystem overhead),
    > KubeVirt tolerates up to 10% less available space. This can be
    > configured with the `pvc-tolerate-less-space-up-to-percent` value
    > in the `kubevirt-config` ConfigMap.

-   Block: Use a block volume for consuming raw block devices. Note: you
    need to enable the BlockVolume feature gate.

A simple example which attaches a `PersistentVolumeClaim` as a `disk`
may look like this:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-pvc
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            lun: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

### dataVolume

DataVolumes are a way to automate importing virtual machine disks onto
PVCs during the virtual machine’s launch flow. Without using a
DataVolume, users have to prepare a PVC with a disk image before
assigning it to a VM or VMI manifest. With a DataVolume, both the PVC
creation and import is automated on behalf of the user.

#### DataVolume VM Behavior

DataVolumes can be defined in the VM spec directly by adding the
DataVolumes to the `dataVolumeTemplates` list. Below is an example.

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachine
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-alpine-datavolume
      name: vm-alpine-datavolume
    spec:
      running: false
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            kubevirt.io/vm: vm-alpine-datavolume
        spec:
          domain:
            devices:
              disks:
              - disk:
                  bus: virtio
                name: datavolumedisk1
            resources:
              requests:
                memory: 64M
          volumes:
          - dataVolume:
              name: alpine-dv
            name: datavolumedisk1
      dataVolumeTemplates:
      - metadata:
          name: alpine-dv
        spec:
          pvc:
            accessModes:
            - ReadWriteOnce
            resources:
              requests:
                storage: 2Gi
          source:
            http:
              url: http://cdi-http-import-server.kubevirt/images/alpine.iso

You can see the DataVolume defined in the dataVolumeTemplates section
has two parts. The **source** and **pvc**

The **source** part declares that there is a disk image living on an
http server that we want to use as a volume for this VM. The **pvc**
part declares the spec that should be used to create the PVC that hosts
the **source** data.

When this VM manifest is posted to the cluster, as part of the launch
flow a PVC will be created using the spec provided and the source data
will be automatically imported into that PVC before the VM starts. When
the VM is deleted, the storage provisioned by the DataVolume will
automatically be deleted as well.

#### DataVolume VMI Behavior

For a VMI object, DataVolumes can be referenced as a volume source for
the VMI. When this is done, it is expected that the referenced
DataVolume exists in the cluster. The VMI will consume the DataVolume,
but the DataVolume’s life-cycle will not be tied to the VMI.

Below is an example of a DataVolume being referenced by a VMI. It is
expected that the DataVolume *alpine-datavolume* was created prior to
posting the VMI manifest to the cluster. It is okay to post the VMI
manifest to the cluster while the DataVolume is still having data
imported. KubeVirt knows not to start the VMI until all referenced
DataVolumes have finished their clone and import phases.

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-alpine-datavolume
      name: vmi-alpine-datavolume
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: disk1
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - name: volume1
        dataVolume:
          name: alpine-datavolume

#### Enabling DataVolume support.

A DataVolume is a custom resource provided by the Containerized Data
Importer (CDI) project. KubeVirt integrates with CDI in order to provide
users a workflow for dynamically creating PVCs and importing data into
those PVCs.

In order to take advantage of the DataVolume volume source on a VM or
VMI, the **DataVolumes** feature gate must be enabled in the
**kubevirt-config** config map before KubeVirt is installed. CDI must
also be installed.

**Installing CDI**

Go to the [CDI release
page](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/releases)

Pick the latest stable release and post the corresponding
cdi-controller-deployment.yaml manifest to your cluster.

**Enabling the DataVolumes feature gate**

Below is an example of how to enable DataVolume support using the
kubevirt-config config map.

    cat <<EOF | kubectl create -f -
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: kubevirt-config
      namespace: kubevirt
      labels:
        kubevirt.io: ""
    data:
      feature-gates: "DataVolumes"
    EOF

This config map assumes KubeVirt will be installed in the kubevirt
namespace. Change the namespace to suite your installation.

First post the ConfigMap above, then install KubeVirt. At that point
DataVolume integration will be enabled.

### ephemeral

An ephemeral volume is a local COW (copy on write) image that uses a
network volume as a read-only backing store. With an ephemeral volume,
the network backing store is never mutated. Instead all writes are
stored on the ephemeral image which exists on local storage. KubeVirt
dynamically generates the ephemeral images associated with a VM when the
VM starts, and discards the ephemeral images when the VM stops.

Ephemeral volumes are useful in any scenario where disk persistence is
not desired. The COW image is discarded when VM reaches a final state
(e.g., succeeded, failed).

Currently, only `PersistentVolumeClaim` may be used as a backing store
of the ephemeral volume.

Up-to-date information on supported backing stores can be found in the
[KubeVirt
API](http://kubevirt.io/api-reference/master/definitions.html#_v1_ephemeralvolumesource).

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-ephemeral-pvc
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            lun: {}
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          ephemeral:
            persistentVolumeClaim:
              claimName: mypvc

### containerDisk

**containerDisk was originally registryDisk, please update your code
when needed.**

The `containerDisk` feature provides the ability to store and distribute
VM disks in the container image registry. `containerDisks` can be
assigned to VMs in the disks section of the VirtualMachineInstance spec.

No network shared storage devices are utilized by `containerDisks`. The
disks are pulled from the container registry and reside on the local
node hosting the VMs that consume the disks.

#### When to use a containerDisk

`containerDisks` are ephemeral storage devices that can be assigned to
any number of active VirtualMachineInstances. This makes them an ideal
tool for users who want to replicate a large number of VM workloads that
do not require persistent data. `containerDisks` are commonly used in
conjunction with VirtualMachineInstanceReplicaSets.

#### When Not to use a containerDisk

`containerDisks` are not a good solution for any workload that requires
persistent root disks across VM restarts.

#### containerDisk Workflow Example

Users can inject a VirtualMachineInstance disk into a container image in
a way that is consumable by the KubeVirt runtime. Disks must be placed
into the `/disk` directory inside the container. Raw and qcow2 formats
are supported. Qcow2 is recommended in order to reduce the container
image’s size. Containerdisks can and should be based on `scratch`. No
content except the image is required.

> **Note:** Prior to kubevirt 0.20, the containerDisk image needed to
> have **kubevirt/container-disk-v1alpha** as base image.

> **Note:** The containerDisk needs to be readable for the user with the UID
> 107 (qemu).

Example: Inject a local VirtualMachineInstance disk into a container image.

    cat << END > Dockerfile
    FROM scratch
    ADD --chown=107:107 fedora25.qcow2 /disk/
    END

    docker build -t vmidisks/fedora25:latest .

Example: Inject a remote VirtualMachineInstance disk into a container image.

    cat << END > Dockerfile
    FROM scratch
    ADD --chown=107:107 https://cloud.centos.org/centos/7/images/CentOS-7-x86_64-GenericCloud.qcow2 /disk/
    END

Example: Upload the ContainerDisk container image to a registry.

    docker push vmidisks/fedora25:latest

Example: Attach the ContainerDisk as an ephemeral disk to a VM.

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-containerdisk
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: containerdisk
            disk: {}
      volumes:
        - name: containerdisk
          containerDisk:
            image: vmidisks/fedora25:latest

Note that a `containerDisk` is file-based and therefore cannot be
attached as a `lun` device to the VM.

#### Custom disk image path

ContainerDisk also allows to store disk images in any folder, when
required. The process is the same as previous. The main difference is,
that in custom location, kubevirt does not scan for any image. It is
your responsibility to provide full path for the disk image. Providing
image `path` is optional. When no `path` is provided, kubevirt searches
for disk images in default location: `/disk`.

Example: Build container disk image:

    cat << END > Dockerfile
    FROM scratch
    ADD fedora25.qcow2 /custom-disk-path/fedora25.qcow2
    END

    docker build -t vmidisks/fedora25:latest .
    docker push vmidisks/fedora25:latest

Create VMI with container disk pointing to the custom location:

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-containerdisk
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: containerdisk
            disk: {}
      volumes:
        - name: containerdisk
          containerDisk:
            image: vmidisks/fedora25:latest
            path: /custom-disk-path/fedora25.qcow2

### emptyDisk

An `emptyDisk` works similar to an `emptyDir` in Kubernetes. An extra
sparse `qcow2` disk will be allocated and it will live as long as the
VM. Thus it will survive guest side VM reboots, but not a VM
re-creation. The disk `capacity` needs to be specified.

Example: Boot cirros with an extra `emptyDisk` with a size of `2GiB`:

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      name: testvmi-nocloud
    spec:
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 5
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
        devices:
          disks:
          - name: containerdisk
            disk:
              bus: virtio
          - name: emptydisk
            disk:
              bus: virtio
      volumes:
        - name: containerdisk
          containerDisk:
            image: kubevirt/cirros-registry-disk-demo:latest
        - name: emptydisk
          emptyDisk:
            capacity: 2Gi

#### When to use an emptyDisk

Ephemeral VMs very often come with read-only root images and limited
tmpfs space. In many cases this is not enough to install application
dependencies and provide enough disk space for the application data.
While this data is not critical and thus can be lost, it is still needed
for the application to function properly during its lifetime. This is
where an `emptyDisk` can be useful. An emptyDisk is often used and
mounted somewhere in `/var/lib` or `/var/run`.

### hostDisk

A `hostDisk` volume type provides the ability to create or use a disk
image located somewhere on a node. It works similar to a `hostPath` in
Kubernetes and provides two usage types:

-   `DiskOrCreate` if a disk image does not exist at a given location
    then create one

-   `Disk` a disk image must exist at a given location

Example: Create a 1Gi disk image located at /data/disk.img and attach it
to a VM.

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-host-disk
      name: vmi-host-disk
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: host-disk
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - hostDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
          path: /data/disk.img
          type: DiskOrCreate
        name: host-disk
    status: {}

### configMap

A `configMap` is a reference to a
[ConfigMap](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-configmap/)
in Kubernetes. An extra `iso` disk will be allocated which has to be
mounted on a VM. To mount the `configMap` users can use `cloudInit` and
the disks serial number. The `name` needs to be set for a reference to
the created kubernetes `ConfigMap`.

> **Note:** Currently, ConfigMap update propagation is not supported. If
> a ConfigMap is updated, only a pod will be aware of changes, not
> running VMIs.

> **Note:** Due to a Kubernetes CRD
> [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/68466), you
> cannot control the paths within the volume where ConfigMap keys are
> projected.

Example: Attach the `configMap` to a VM and use `cloudInit` to mount the
`iso` disk:

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-fedora
      name: vmi-fedora
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: containerdisk
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: cloudinitdisk
          - disk: {}
            name: app-config-disk
            # set serial
            serial: CVLY623300HK240D
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - name: containerdisk
        containerDisk:
          image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo:latest
      - cloudInitNoCloud:
          userData: |-
            #cloud-config
            password: fedora
            chpasswd: { expire: False }
            bootcmd:
              # mount the ConfigMap
              - "mkdir /mnt/app-config"
              - "mount /dev/$(lsblk --nodeps -no name,serial | grep CVLY623300HK240D | cut -f1 -d' ') /mnt/app-config"
        name: cloudinitdisk
      - configMap:
          name: app-config
        name: app-config-disk
    status: {}

### secret

A `secret` is a reference to a
[Secret](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) in
Kubernetes. An extra `iso` disk will be allocated which has to be
mounted on a VM. To mount the `secret` users can use `cloudInit` and the
disks serial number. The `secretName` needs to be set for a reference to
the created kubernetes `Secret`.

> **Note:** Currently, Secret update propagation is not supported. If a
> Secret is updated, only a pod will be aware of changes, not running
> VMIs.

> **Note:** Due to a Kubernetes CRD
> [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/68466), you
> cannot control the paths within the volume where Secret keys are
> projected.

Example: Attach the `secret` to a VM and use `cloudInit` to mount the
`iso` disk:

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-fedora
      name: vmi-fedora
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: containerdisk
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: cloudinitdisk
          - disk: {}
            name: app-secret-disk
            # set serial
            serial: D23YZ9W6WA5DJ487
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - name: containerdisk
        containerDisk:
          image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo:latest
      - cloudInitNoCloud:
          userData: |-
            #cloud-config
            password: fedora
            chpasswd: { expire: False }
            bootcmd:
              # mount the Secret
              - "mkdir /mnt/app-secret"
              - "mount /dev/$(lsblk --nodeps -no name,serial | grep D23YZ9W6WA5DJ487 | cut -f1 -d' ') /mnt/app-secret"
        name: cloudinitdisk
      - secret:
          secretName: app-secret
        name: app-secret-disk
    status: {}

### serviceAccount

A `serviceAccount` volume references a Kubernetes
[`ServiceAccount`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/).
A new `iso` disk will be allocated with the content of the service
account (`namespace`, `token` and `ca.crt`), which needs to be mounted
in the VM. For automatic mounting, see the `configMap` and `secret`
examples above.

Example:

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-fedora
      name: vmi-fedora
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: containerdisk
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: serviceaccountdisk
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 1024M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - name: containerdisk
        containerDisk:
          image: kubevirt/fedora-cloud-container-disk-demo:latest
      - name: serviceaccountdisk
        serviceAccount:
          serviceAccountName: default

High Performance Features
-------------------------

### IOThreads

Libvirt has the ability to use IOThreads for dedicated disk access (for
supported devices). These are dedicated event loop threads that perform
block I/O requests and improve scalability on SMP systems. KubeVirt
exposes this libvirt feature through the `ioThreadsPolicy` setting.
Additionaly, each `Disk` device exposes a `dedicatedIOThread` setting.
This is a boolean that indicates the specified disk should be allocated
an exclusive IOThread that will never be shared with other disks.

Currently valid policies are `shared` and `auto`. If `ioThreadsPolicy`
is omitted entirely, use of IOThreads will be disabled. However, if any
disk requests a dedicated IOThread, `ioThreadsPolicy` will be enabled
and default to `shared`.

#### Shared

An `ioThreadsPolicy` of `shared` indicates that KubeVirt should use one
thread that will be shared by all disk devices. This policy stems from
the fact that large numbers of IOThreads is generally not useful as
additional context switching is incurred for each thread.

Disks with `dedicatedIOThread` set to `true` will not use the shared
thread, but will instead be allocated an exclusive thread. This is
generally useful if a specific Disk is expected to have heavy I/O
traffic, e.g. a database spindle.

#### Auto

`auto` IOThreads indicates that KubeVirt should use a pool of IOThreads
and allocate disks to IOThreads in a round-robin fashion. The pool size
is generally limited to twice the number of VCPU’s allocated to the VM.
This essentially attempts to dedicate disks to separate IOThreads, but
only up to a reasonable limit. This would come in to play for systems
with a large number of disks and a smaller number of CPU’s for instance.

As a caveat to the size of the IOThread pool, disks with
`dedicatedIOThread` will always be guaranteed their own thread. This
effectively diminishes the upper limit of the number of threads
allocated to the rest of the disks. For example, a VM with 2 CPUs would
normally use 4 IOThreads for all disks. However if one disk had
`dedicatedIOThread` set to true, then KubeVirt would only use 3
IOThreads for the shared pool.

There is always guaranteed to be at least one thread for disks that will
use the shared IOThreads pool. Thus if a sufficiently large number of
disks have dedicated IOThreads assigned, `auto` and `shared` policies
would essentially result in the same layout.

#### IOThreads with Dedicated (pinned) CPUs

When guest’s vCPUs are pinned to a host’s physical CPUs, it is also best
to pin the IOThreads to specific CPUs to prevent these from floating
between the CPUs. KubeVirt will automatically calculate and pin each
IOThread to a CPU or a set of CPUs, depending on the ration between
them. In case there are more IOThreads than CPUs, each IOThread will be
pinned to a CPU, in a round-robin fashion. Otherwise, when there are
fewer IOThreads than CPU, each IOThread will be pinned to a set of CPUs.

#### IOThreads with QEMU Emulator thread and Dedicated (pinned) CPUs

To further improve the vCPUs latency, KubeVirt can allocate an
additional dedicated physical CPU[1](creation/dedicated-cpu.md), exclusively for the emulator thread, to which it will
be pinned. This will effectively "isolate" the emulator thread from the vCPUs
of the VMI. When `ioThreadsPolicy` is set to `auto` IOThreads will also be
"isolated" from the vCPUs and placed on the same physical CPU as the QEMU
emulator thread.

### Examples

#### Shared IOThreads

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-shared
      name: vmi-shared
    spec:
      domain:
        ioThreadsPolicy: shared
        cpu:
          cores: 2
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: mydisk
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk
            dedicatedIOThread: true
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk2
            dedicatedIOThread: true
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk3
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk4
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk5
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk6
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
      volumes:
      - name: mydisk
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: mypvc
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk2
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk3
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk4
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk5
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk6

In this example, emptydisk and emptydisk2 both request a dedicated
IOThread. mydisk, and emptydisk 3 through 6 will all shared one
IOThread.

    mypvc:        1
    emptydisk:    2
    emptydisk2:   3
    emptydisk3:   1
    emptydisk4:   1
    emptydisk5:   1
    emptydisk6:   1

#### Auto IOThreads

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-shared
      name: vmi-shared
    spec:
      domain:
        ioThreadsPolicy: auto
        cpu:
          cores: 2
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: mydisk
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk
            dedicatedIOThread: true
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk2
            dedicatedIOThread: true
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk3
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk4
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk5
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: emptydisk6
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
      volumes:
      - name: mydisk
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: mypvc
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk2
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk3
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk4
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk5
      - emptyDisk:
          capacity: 1Gi
        name: emptydisk6

This VM is identical to the first, except it requests auto IOThreads.
`emptydisk` and `emptydisk2` will still be allocated individual
IOThreads, but the rest of the disks will be split across 2 separate
iothreads (twice the number of CPU cores is 4).

Disks will be assigned to IOThreads like this:

    mypvc:        1
    emptydisk:    3
    emptydisk2:   4
    emptydisk3:   2
    emptydisk4:   1
    emptydisk5:   2
    emptydisk6:   1

### Virtio Block Multi-Queue

Block Multi-Queue is a framework for the Linux block layer that maps
Device I/O queries to multiple queues. This splits I/O processing up
across multiple threads, and therefor multiple CPUs. libvirt recommends
that the number of queues used should match the number of CPUs allocated
for optimal performance.

This feature is enabled by the `BlockMultiQueue` setting under
`Devices`:

    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          blockMultiQueue: true
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: mydisk

**Note:** Due to the way KubeVirt implements CPU allocation,
blockMultiQueue can only be used if a specific CPU allocation is
requested. If a specific number of CPUs hasn’t been allocated to a
VirtualMachine, KubeVirt will use all CPU’s on the node on a best effort
basis. In that case the amount of CPU allocation to a VM at the host
level could change over time. If blockMultiQueue were to request a
number of queues to match all the CPUs on a node, that could lead to
over-allocation scenarios. To avoid this, KubeVirt enforces that a
specific slice of CPU resources is requested in order to take advantage
of this feature.

#### Example

    metadata:
      name: testvmi-disk
    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    spec:
      domain:
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
            cpu: 4
        devices:
          blockMultiQueue: true
          disks:
          - name: mypvcdisk
            disk:
              bus: virtio
      volumes:
        - name: mypvcdisk
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: mypvc

This example will enable Block Multi-Queue for the disk `mypvcdisk` and
allocate 4 queues (to match the number of CPUs requested).

### Disk device cache

KubeVirt supports `none` and `writethrough` KVM/QEMU cache modes.

-   `none` I/O from the guest is not cached on the host. Use this option
    for guests with large I/O requirements. This option is generally the
    best choice.

-   `writethrough` I/O from the guest is cached on the host but written
    through to the physical medium.

> **Important:** `none` cache mode is set as default if the file system
> supports direct I/O, otherwise, `writethrough` is used.

> **Note:** It is possible to force a specific cache mode, although if
> `none` mode has been chosen and the file system does not support
> direct I/O then started VMI will return an error.

Example: force `writethrough` cache mode

    apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1alpha3
    kind: VirtualMachineInstance
    metadata:
      labels:
        special: vmi-pvc
      name: vmi-pvc
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: pvcdisk
            cache: writethrough
        machine:
          type: ""
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 64M
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - name: pvcdisk
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: disk-alpine
    status: {}
