VirtualMachineInstance Node Eviction
------------------------------------

Before removing a kubernetes node from the cluster, users will want to
ensure that VirtualMachineInstances have been gracefully terminated
before powering down the node. Since all VirtualMachineInstances are
backed by a Pod, the recommended method of evicting
VirtualMachineInstances is to use the *kubectl drain* command, or in the
case of OpenShift the *oc adm drain* command.

How to Evict all VMs on a Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Select the node you’d like to evict VirtualMachineInstances from by
identifying the node from the list of cluster nodes.

`kubectl get nodes`

The following command will gracefully terminate all VMs on a specific
node. Replace ** with the target node you want the eviction to occur on.

`kubectl drain <node name> --delete-local-data --ignore-daemonsets=true --force --pod-selector=kubevirt.io=virt-launcher`

Below is a break down of why each argument passed to the drain command
is required.

* `kubectl drain <node name>` is selecting a specific node as a target
for the eviction
* `--delete-local-data` is a required flag that is necessary for
removing any pod that utilizes an emptyDir volume. The
VirtualMachineInstance Pod does use emptryDir volumes, however the data
in those volumes are ephemeral which means it is safe to delete after
termination.
* `--ignore-daemonsets=true` is a required flag because every node
running a VirtualMachineInstance will also be running our helper
DaemonSet called virt-handler. DaemonSets are not allowed to be evicted
using *kubectl drain*. By default, if this command encounters a
DaemonSet on the target node, the command will fail. This flag tells the
command it is safe to proceed with the eviction and to just ignore
DaemonSets.
* `--force` is a required flag because VirtualMachineInstance pods are
not owned by a ReplicaSet or DaemonSet controller. This means kubectl
can’t guarantee that the pods being terminated on the target node will
get re-scheduled replacements placed else where in the cluster after the
pods are evicted. KubeVirt has its own controllers which manage the
underlying VirtualMachineInstance pods. Each controller behaves
differently to a VirtualMachineInstance being evicted. That behavior is
outlined futher down in this document.
* `--pod-selector=kubevirt.io=virt-launcher` means only
VirtualMachineInstance pods managed by KubeVirt will be removed from the
node.

How to Evict all VMs and Pods on a Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By removing the *–pod-selector* argument from the previous command, we
can issue the eviction of all Pods on a node. This command ensures Pods
associated with VMs as well as all other Pods are evicted from the
target node.

`kubectl drain <node name> --delete-local-data --ignore-daemonsets=true --force`

Re-enabling a Node after Eviction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *kubectl drain* will result in the target node being marked as
unschedulable. This means the node will not be eligible for running new
VirtualMachineInstances or Pods.

If it is decided that the target node should become schedulable again,
the following command must be run.

`kubectl uncordon <node name>`

or in the case of OpenShift

`oc adm uncordon <node name`

Shutting down a Node after Eviction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

From KubeVirt’s perspective, a node is safe to shutdown once all
VirtualMachineInstances have been evicted from the node. In a multi-use
cluster where VirtualMachineInstances are being scheduled along side
other containerized workloads, it is up to the cluster admin to ensure
all other pods have been safely evicted before powering down the node.

VirtualMachine Evictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The eviction of any VirtualMachineInstance that is owned by a
VirtualMachine set to *running=true* will result in the
VirtualMachineInstance being re-scheduled to another node.

The VirtualMachineInstance in this case will be forced to power down and
restart on another node. In the future once KubeVirt introduces live
migration support, the VM will be able to seamlessly migrate to another
node during eviction.

VirtualMachineInstanceReplicaSet Eviction Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The eviction of VirtualMachineInstances owned by a
VirtualMachineInstanceReplicaSet will result in the
VirtualMachineInstanceReplicaSet scheduling replacements for the evicted
VirtualMachineInstances on other nodes in the cluster.

VirtualMachineInstance Eviction Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

VirtualMachineInstances not backed by either a
VirtualMachineInstanceReplicaSet or an VirtualMachine object will not be
re-scheduled after eviction.
